---
title: 'Sightsee, in-depth'
excerpt: 'A closer look at the tools behind one of my bigger projects, and how they stack up to the previous version'
date: '2022-03-15T09:59:11.253Z'
tags: [Fullstack]
---

I’d like to take a closer look at the different aspects of this app a little closer, generally speaking, this is a pretty standard template for a full-stack app, with crud functionality, environment variables, and a react app with global state management. So this may prove useful for someone looking for a rough guideline, or starting template of sorts.

## Backend

Start from—well—the start, initiating a basic server with express is as straightforward as it gets, at time of writing things like JSON parsing comes baked into Express (I mention this because it was previously not the case, and a separate package called body-parser needed to be installed)

In my approach, I like to split the API into:

- **Routes**, that handle routing and authorization logic
- **Controllers**, which handle all the rest of the logic, meaning crud, authentication, and so forth
- **lib/utils** which house utility functions like an async wrapper, custom error class, and database connection and instance
- **Models** which the schema for the various entities in the app; user, vacation, and follow.
- **Server and app**, index files, one which handles building up the API and one that handles the server itself.

### Database

In this case, I decided to—at least on paper—make life easier for myself by utilizing the popular ORM sequelize. I must admit I ran into some challenges when it came to getting started, since the package has been around for quite a while, and has been through many revisions (I think it was v7) it might be difficult to get up to date, accurate resources. Now I'd say this is a minor inconvenience at most, since the library hasn't changed **that** much, but it can lead to some irksome errors when you realize a method has been renamed between versions, and now your code is spitting out errors. Not to mention I don't particularly like sequelizes documentation, I found its search function specifically to be a bit janky, spitting not super relevant results, and even when you find what you're looking, poor typographic hierarchy makes it difficult to discern where what you're looking for starts and ends. 

But once I got the ball rolling I must admit this was a much nicer way to work with SQL, not to say that it's very difficult to write SQL queries, especially with modern tooling.

Last time around I used the mysql2 package with the sqltools vs code extension to test them out. 

### Authentication & authorization

This is a pretty big topic, and one I'm not planning to delve too deep into, this isn't a tutorial as much as it is a rough process map.

But here are some general tips

1. Probably the most important and accurate wisdom I can impart; we developers are bad at security. 

This is a universal truth, and the reason you'll always use a separate, dedicated service to handle the heavy lifting. In my case, this was jwts and bcrypt.

This is also part of the reason many apps—and as a consequence, developers—switch to a third-party solution, like auth0 or Firebase. A growing trend I've seen is email tokens as a solution, basically offsetting the heavy lifting of auth to your email provider, which is going to—most assuredly—have better security than you or I could manage.

But, I believe it's better to do things the hard way the first time around, rather than the inverse, that's why in 3 separate apps—with three different necessities and approaches—I chose to implement auth from scratch with jwt and bcrypt. 

Keeping things as short as possible, think of jwt as a secret code, generated by the API and expected in response whenever you want to do something. Imagine one of those underground bars, that have a password that you need to get in. Well, it's essentially that—the API provides you a password and expects to hear anytime you wanna do stuff, this password is extra special, because it can carry a payload, think data hidden in the token, accessible upon decoding. Here you can put things like user data, that you'd probably need anyway for accurate operation. This is where authentication stops and authorization begins. Now that the API knows it’s you, it can gauge who you are and what you're allowed to do.

There's a couple of ways you can handle this, I've seen some implement a ‘big’ Middleware that runs before going through the routes, checks first if authorization is necessary, and then runs the check, in fact, I think that's what the package express-jwt does. But for me, I preferred a different approach; creating a protection middleware and placing it before the necessary routes and endpoints.

This is the big reason routes are split from controllers, as more routes and methods are added, the routes threaten to become too bloated, making it difficult to—for example—use them as a reference when working on the front-end. This way the routes stay clear, this coupled with modern Express’ router lets you create a very coherent map of routes and their various middlewares. Looking at the source code you could simply say that: protect handles authentication and restrictTo handles authorization, with the former validating the token and passing user data to the header, and the latter checking if that user is an admin or not.

## Frontend

I'd describe the front as a pretty modern implementation of a very common front stack; it uses CRA, but scaffolded with vite so it's very fast, it uses redux, but with the modern redux toolkit and rtk query, and essentially standard class-based CSS, but with tailwind utility classes.

So everything is pretty well established, so let's run by it real quick

### React

React is react, as I said previously this is not a tutorial, I'm not gonna delve into what react is and how it works here. Instead let's take a closer look at something you might be less familiar with, namely Vite.

### Vite

As I mentioned before Vite is hecka fast, and if you’re not familiar with stuff like build tools you might not even know what it is and why that matters.

The plain and simple is this: try and scaffold an app with create-react-app, and then try to do the same with vite, then come back and tell me which is faster. Spoiler alert, its vite—by a mile.

That’s essentially all you need to know about it, it makes scaffolding projects better.

And while personally my preferred react ‘flavor’ is nextjs, vite has quite a few options, such as: react, preact, vite, vanilla, and more. It’s the preferred method of scaffolding a Vue app at this point(which makes sense, since it’s from the same guy), and if you’ve ever needed a vanilla project and shuddered at the thought of having to mess with a bundler like webpack, then is your best friend. 

### Redux

This here is one of the two biggest reasons—along with sequelize—that I wanted to redo this project, I really wanted to explore this new way of using redux, that I haven't heard much of, but has already replaced previous versions as the recommended go-to approach by the redux team.

The most important part to understand is that this approach is redux taking the wheel, handling the logic for anything from store creation to 

### react-hook-form & react-router-dom

I don’t think there’s much to say about these two separately, they’ve both changed rather recently, but still, they’re among the most used and integral libraries when it comes to react development—well, at least if you’re using CRA—and the changes made to them are probably known to anyone working with react at the time of writing.

However, I must admit they came as news to me, react-hook-form v7 was maybe my first experience with libraries just doing whatever and breaking all yer shit.

react-router-dom I must imagine has been struggling since the new kids—next and gatsby—came on the scene and supported their, simpler method of navigation. I recall when working on the original version of this project that protected routes were somewhat cumbersome, and while it did take me a minute to get the gist, I have to admit the new way is much better. Using an auth wrapper component, you check whether the user is authenticated, if he isn’t you can redirect him to login using react-router-doms own Navigate component, and if he is you simply let the component run its course and return its children, i.e. the protected content. I have to say I like this approach, as it completely decouples authentication concerns from content concerns.

react-hook-form hasn’t honestly changed that much, the syntax has changed—into a stranger one—but other than that has stayed quite familiar.

### Tailwind CSS

The utility-first CSS framework; Pretty everyone knows what tailwind is at this point, I must say that for me, while I prefer something like styled-components for absolute control, and chakra-ui for a hands-off approach, tailwind offers probably the best compromise between these two states: control and customization, and simplifying the process of actually writing CSS.

- Its defaults are clean, tasteful, and as unopinionated as I think a design tool like this could be.
- Implementing is easy as pie, two CLI commands, and a quick config and you’re good to go.
- Its documentation and community support are excellent, so there’s no shortage of info on how to implement components and extend/change its style to suit your brand.

### So to conclude:

the tl;dr is this - you could say this project is a test of the latest and greatest web development has to offer, RTK, Vite, Tailwind, etc. And the verdict is: it’s great. While I have improved significantly since the first rendition of this project, it’s staggering the difference modern tools have on developer experience, and so keeping up-to-date on what the tools behind your app are up to, can make your life easier.

Or break all your shit, c’est la vie[🤷](https://emojipedia.org/person-shrugging/).
